README.md, before:

# AI File Assistant (Backend)

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen)](https://github.com/yourusername/ai-file-assistant/actions)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

A modern, AI-powered backend for file management, semantic search, and document understanding. Built with Spring Boot, PostgreSQL (pgvector), and integrates with Ollama, OpenAI/Groq, and more. **No frontend is included in this repository.**

---

## ✨ Features

- **Real-Time File Monitoring & Indexing**
  - Watches specified directories for file creation, modification, and deletion.
  - Automatically indexes new and changed files, and removes deleted files from the index.
  - Supports a wide range of file types: text, PDF, Office documents, images, and more.

- **Advanced File Processing**
  - Extracts metadata and content using Apache Tika.
  - Performs OCR on images and scanned documents using Tesseract.
  - Chunks large documents for efficient storage and retrieval.
  - Computes file hashes and tracks file attributes (owner, permissions, etc.).

- **Semantic & Hybrid Search**
  - Generates vector embeddings for file content using local (Ollama) or cloud (OpenAI/Groq) models.
  - Stores embeddings in PostgreSQL with pgvector for fast semantic search.
  - Supports hybrid search: combines semantic (vector) and keyword (Elasticsearch) search for best results.
  - Exposes search via REST API and MCP protocol.

- **AI-Powered Document Understanding**
  - Integrates with LLMs for:
    - Semantic Q&A over your files.
    - Document and image classification.
    - Summarization and extraction of key information.
    - Custom prompt workflows via MCP.

- **Task Management & Monitoring**
  - Tracks the status of file processing and indexing tasks.
  - Provides endpoints to monitor and query task progress.

- **Security**
  - All endpoints (including MCP) are protected by OAuth2/JWT (e.g., Keycloak).
  - Fine-grained role extraction and stateless session management.

- **Extensible Protocol Interface (MCP)**
  - Exposes prompt-driven, tool-augmented LLM workflows via the Model Context Protocol (MCP).
  - Allows clients to discover and invoke custom prompts and tools over a secure, authenticated endpoint.

---

## 🏗️ Architecture & Tech Stack

- **Backend**: Java 17+, Spring Boot 3, Spring AI, JPA
- **Database**: PostgreSQL 13+ with [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector)
- **Search**: Elasticsearch 8+ (optional)
- **AI/LLM**: Ollama (local), OpenAI/Groq (cloud)
- **Text Extraction**: Apache Tika, Tesseract OCR
- **Security**: OAuth2/OIDC (Keycloak), JWT
- **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose

---

## 🤖 Model Context Protocol (MCP) with Spring AI

This project implements the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec) using Spring AI's MCP server features. MCP provides a standardized, protocol-based interface for prompt-driven, tool-augmented LLM workflows.

### What is MCP?
- MCP is an open protocol for interacting with LLMs, tools, and prompt workflows in a structured, extensible way.
- It enables clients to discover, invoke, and interact with prompts, tools, and system capabilities over a single endpoint.

### How is MCP used here?
- **Spring AI MCP Server**: Enabled and configured via `application.properties` (see below).
- **Prompt Specifications**: Custom prompts for vector search queries, result formatting, and file search are registered as MCP prompt specifications in `MCPConfiguration.java`.
- **Tool Integration**: File search and vector search tools are exposed to the MCP server, allowing LLMs to invoke them as part of prompt workflows.
- **Prompt Templates**: Prompt templates for vector search and result formatting are provided in `src/main/resources/` (e.g., `vector_search_query_template.txt`, `vector_search_result_format_system_prompt.txt`).
- **Capabilities**: Supports synchronous (SYNC) prompt execution, tool invocation, and change notifications.
- **Endpoint**: The MCP server is available at `/mcp/message` (SSE endpoint).

### Security of MCP Endpoint
- The MCP endpoint (`/mcp/message`) is protected by Spring Security using OAuth2 Resource Server (JWT).
- **All requests require a valid JWT** (e.g., from Keycloak or another OIDC provider).
- The JWT is validated using the issuer and JWK set URI configured in `application.properties`.
- A custom `JwtConverter` extracts user identity and roles from the token, supporting Keycloak-style resource roles.
- Session management is stateless.
- **Example: Accessing MCP with a JWT**
    ```http
    GET /mcp/message
    Authorization: Bearer <your-jwt-token>
    ```
- **Relevant configuration:**
- Replace the values in `application.properties` with your Keycloak configuration: In this example, we're using Keycloak at `http://localhost:9090/realms/home`.
- Keycloak port 9090
- Keycloak realm: `home`
- Keycloak client: `mcpfileclient`

    ```properties
    spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri=http://localhost:9090/realms/home/protocol/openid-connect/certs
    spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=http://localhost:9090/realms/home
    jwt.auth.converter.resource-id=mcpfileclient
    jwt.auth.converter.principle-attribute=preferred_username
    ```
- You can further customize access control by editing `SecurityConfiguration.java`.

### Example MCP Configuration (application.properties)
```properties
spring.ai.mcp.server.name=ai-file-monitor
spring.ai.mcp.server.version=1.0.0
spring.ai.mcp.server.type=SYNC
spring.ai.mcp.server.sse-message-endpoint=/mcp/message
spring.ai.mcp.server.capabilities.tool=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.resource-change-notification=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.tool-change-notification=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.prompt-change-notification=true
```

### Extending MCP
- Add new prompt templates or tools in `MCPConfiguration.java`.
- Provide new prompt resources in `src/main/resources/`.
- Register additional capabilities or endpoints as needed.

For more details, see the [MCP specification](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec) and the Spring AI documentation.

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Java 17+
- Maven 3.8+
- PostgreSQL 13+ with pgvector
- Docker & Docker Compose
- Tesseract OCR
- Ollama (for local LLMs)
- (Optional) Elasticsearch 8+, Keycloak

### 1. Clone the Repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/ai-file-assistant.git
cd ai-file-assistant
```

### 2. Database & Services
- Use provided Docker Compose files:
  - `docker/pgvector/docker-compose.yml` for PostgreSQL + pgvector
  - `docker/elasticsearch/docker-compose.yml` for Elasticsearch + Kibana (optional)

### 3. Configure Application
- Edit `src/main/resources/application.properties` for DB, AI, security, and MCP settings
- Set environment variables for secrets (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`)

### 4. Build & Run
```bash
mvn clean install
mvn spring-boot:run
```

---

## ⚙️ Configuration

All configuration is in `src/main/resources/application.properties`.
- **Database**: `spring.datasource.*`
- **AI Models**: Ollama, OpenAI/Groq keys and model names
- **File Watch**: `file.watch.directories=/path/to/watch`
- **Vector Store**: `vector.store.*`
- **Security**: OAuth2/JWT endpoints
- **Elasticsearch**: `spring.elasticsearch.*`
- **MCP**: `spring.ai.mcp.server.*` (see above for example)

Keycloak configuration:
- Essentially, keycloak is used for authentication and authorization
- Following accounts are created for MCP Server and Client in keycloak
  - For JWT token validation and for client app - mcpfileclient
  - To obtain MCP Server details at the time of MCP Client startup - mcpclient
  - Users with roles to login at MCP Client to access MCP Server
---

## 🛠️ API Endpoints

### File Operations
- `POST /files/remove?id={fileId}` — Remove a file
- `GET /files/get?id={fileId}` — Get file metadata and chunks

### Task Monitoring
- `GET /index/tasks/{taskId}` — Get status of a specific task
- `GET /index/tasks/all` — Get status of all tasks

### (Other endpoints: semantic search, LLM chat, etc. — see OpenAPI/Swagger docs)

**API Docs:**
- Swagger UI: [http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html](http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html)
- OpenAPI Spec: [http://localhost:8080/v3/api-docs](http://localhost:8080/v3/api-docs)

---

## 🩺 Troubleshooting
- **CORS issues**: Configure allowed origins in Spring Boot
- **DB errors**: Check pgvector extension and DB credentials
- **Model errors**: Ensure Ollama is running and models are downloaded
- **Auth errors**: Check OAuth2/JWT provider and config

---

## 🤝 Contributing
1. Fork the repo
2. Create a feature branch
3. Commit and push your changes
4. Open a Pull Request

---

## 📄 License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments
- [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot)
- [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector)
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/)
- [GROQ](https://groq.com/)
- [Apache Tika](https://tika.apache.org/)
- [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/)
- [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec)
- And all open-source contributors!

Commit message:

Updated README.md with disclaimer

README.md, after:

# AI File Assistant (Backend)

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen)](https://github.com/yourusername/ai-file-assistant/actions)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

A modern, AI-powered backend for file management, semantic search, and document understanding. Built with Spring Boot, PostgreSQL (pgvector), and integrates with Ollama, OpenAI/Groq, and more. **No frontend is included in this repository.**

---

## ✨ Features

- **Real-Time File Monitoring & Indexing**
  - Watches specified directories for file creation, modification, and deletion.
  - Automatically indexes new and changed files, and removes deleted files from the index.
  - Supports a wide range of file types: text, PDF, Office documents, images, and more.

- **Advanced File Processing**
  - Extracts metadata and content using Apache Tika.
  - Performs OCR on images and scanned documents using Tesseract.
  - Chunks large documents for efficient storage and retrieval.
  - Computes file hashes and tracks file attributes (owner, permissions, etc.).

- **Semantic & Hybrid Search**
  - Generates vector embeddings for file content using local (Ollama) or cloud (OpenAI/Groq) models.
  - Stores embeddings in PostgreSQL with pgvector for fast semantic search.
  - Supports hybrid search: combines semantic (vector) and keyword (Elasticsearch) search for best results.
  - Exposes search via REST API and MCP protocol.

- **AI-Powered Document Understanding**
  - Integrates with LLMs for:
    - Semantic Q&A over your files.
    - Document and image classification.
    - Summarization and extraction of key information.
    - Custom prompt workflows via MCP.

- **Task Management & Monitoring**
  - Tracks the status of file processing and indexing tasks.
  - Provides endpoints to monitor and query task progress.

- **Security**
  - All endpoints (including MCP) are protected by OAuth2/JWT (e.g., Keycloak).
  - Fine-grained role extraction and stateless session management.

- **Extensible Protocol Interface (MCP)**
  - Exposes prompt-driven, tool-augmented LLM workflows via the Model Context Protocol (MCP).
  - Allows clients to discover and invoke custom prompts and tools over a secure, authenticated endpoint.

---

## 🏗️ Architecture & Tech Stack

- **Backend**: Java 17+, Spring Boot 3, Spring AI, JPA
- **Database**: PostgreSQL 13+ with [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector)
- **Search**: Elasticsearch 8+ (optional)
- **AI/LLM**: Ollama (local), OpenAI/Groq (cloud)
- **Text Extraction**: Apache Tika, Tesseract OCR
- **Security**: OAuth2/OIDC (Keycloak), JWT
- **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose

---

## 🤖 Model Context Protocol (MCP) with Spring AI

This project implements the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec) using Spring AI's MCP server features. MCP provides a standardized, protocol-based interface for prompt-driven, tool-augmented LLM workflows.

### What is MCP?
- MCP is an open protocol for interacting with LLMs, tools, and prompt workflows in a structured, extensible way.
- It enables clients to discover, invoke, and interact with prompts, tools, and system capabilities over a single endpoint.

### How is MCP used here?
- **Spring AI MCP Server**: Enabled and configured via `application.properties` (see below).
- **Prompt Specifications**: Custom prompts for vector search queries, result formatting, and file search are registered as MCP prompt specifications in `MCPConfiguration.java`.
- **Tool Integration**: File search and vector search tools are exposed to the MCP server, allowing LLMs to invoke them as part of prompt workflows.
- **Prompt Templates**: Prompt templates for vector search and result formatting are provided in `src/main/resources/` (e.g., `vector_search_query_template.txt`, `vector_search_result_format_system_prompt.txt`).
- **Capabilities**: Supports synchronous (SYNC) prompt execution, tool invocation, and change notifications.
- **Endpoint**: The MCP server is available at `/mcp/message` (SSE endpoint).

### Security of MCP Endpoint
- The MCP endpoint (`/mcp/message`) is protected by Spring Security using OAuth2 Resource Server (JWT).
- **All requests require a valid JWT** (e.g., from Keycloak or another OIDC provider).
- The JWT is validated using the issuer and JWK set URI configured in `application.properties`.
- A custom `JwtConverter` extracts user identity and roles from the token, supporting Keycloak-style resource roles.
- Session management is stateless.
- **Example: Accessing MCP with a JWT**
    ```http
    GET /mcp/message
    Authorization: Bearer <your-jwt-token>
    ```
- **Relevant configuration:**
- Replace the values in `application.properties` with your Keycloak configuration: In this example, we're using Keycloak at `http://localhost:9090/realms/home`.
- Keycloak port 9090
- Keycloak realm: `home`
- Keycloak client: `mcpfileclient`

    ```properties
    spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri=http://localhost:9090/realms/home/protocol/openid-connect/certs
    spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=http://localhost:9090/realms/home
    jwt.auth.converter.resource-id=mcpfileclient
    jwt.auth.converter.principle-attribute=preferred_username
    ```
- You can further customize access control by editing `SecurityConfiguration.java`.

### Example MCP Configuration (application.properties)
```properties
spring.ai.mcp.server.name=ai-file-monitor
spring.ai.mcp.server.version=1.0.0
spring.ai.mcp.server.type=SYNC
spring.ai.mcp.server.sse-message-endpoint=/mcp/message
spring.ai.mcp.server.capabilities.tool=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.resource-change-notification=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.tool-change-notification=true
spring.ai.mcp.server.prompt-change-notification=true
```

### Extending MCP
- Add new prompt templates or tools in `MCPConfiguration.java`.
- Provide new prompt resources in `src/main/resources/`.
- Register additional capabilities or endpoints as needed.

For more details, see the [MCP specification](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec) and the Spring AI documentation.

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Java 17+
- Maven 3.8+
- PostgreSQL 13+ with pgvector
- Docker & Docker Compose
- Tesseract OCR
- Ollama (for local LLMs)
- (Optional) Elasticsearch 8+, Keycloak

### 1. Clone the Repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/ai-file-assistant.git
cd ai-file-assistant
```

### 2. Database & Services
- Use provided Docker Compose files:
  - `docker/pgvector/docker-compose.yml` for PostgreSQL + pgvector
  - `docker/elasticsearch/docker-compose.yml` for Elasticsearch + Kibana (optional)

### 3. Configure Application
- Edit `src/main/resources/application.properties` for DB, AI, security, and MCP settings
- Set environment variables for secrets (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`)

### 4. Build & Run
```bash
mvn clean install
mvn spring-boot:run
```

---

## ⚙️ Configuration

All configuration is in `src/main/resources/application.properties`.
- **Database**: `spring.datasource.*`
- **AI Models**: Ollama, OpenAI/Groq keys and model names
- **File Watch**: `file.watch.directories=/path/to/watch`
- **Vector Store**: `vector.store.*`
- **Security**: OAuth2/JWT endpoints
- **Elasticsearch**: `spring.elasticsearch.*`
- **MCP**: `spring.ai.mcp.server.*` (see above for example)

Keycloak configuration:
- Essentially, keycloak is used for authentication and authorization
- Following accounts are created for MCP Server and Client in keycloak
  - For JWT token validation and for client app - mcpfileclient
  - To obtain MCP Server details at the time of MCP Client startup - mcpclient
  - Users with roles to login at MCP Client to access MCP Server
---

## 🛠️ API Endpoints

### File Operations
- `POST /files/remove?id={fileId}` — Remove a file
- `GET /files/get?id={fileId}` — Get file metadata and chunks

### Task Monitoring
- `GET /index/tasks/{taskId}` — Get status of a specific task
- `GET /index/tasks/all` — Get status of all tasks

### (Other endpoints: semantic search, LLM chat, etc. — see OpenAPI/Swagger docs)

**API Docs:**
- Swagger UI: [http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html](http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html)
- OpenAPI Spec: [http://localhost:8080/v3/api-docs](http://localhost:8080/v3/api-docs)

---

## 🩺 Troubleshooting
- **CORS issues**: Configure allowed origins in Spring Boot
- **DB errors**: Check pgvector extension and DB credentials
- **Model errors**: Ensure Ollama is running and models are downloaded
- **Auth errors**: Check OAuth2/JWT provider and config

---

## 📄 License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments
- [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot)
- [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector)
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/)
- [GROQ](https://groq.com/)
- [Apache Tika](https://tika.apache.org/)
- [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/)
- [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/spec)
- And all open-source contributors! 

## Disclaimer

This project is for educational and research purposes only. It is not intended for production use.
Please use at your own risk and ensure proper security measures are in place.
